README.md, before:

# AUTOMATED-REPORT-GENERATION

*COMPANY*: CODTECH IT SOLUTIONS

*NAME*: SAKHARAM SAWANT

*INTERN ID*: CT04DR2481

*DOMAIN*: PYTHON PROGRAMMING

*DURATION*: 4 WEEKS

*MENTOR*: NEELA SANTHOSH

Task 2: Automated Report Generation Using Python

Introduction

This project has been developed as part of the CODTECH Python Programming Internship. Task 2 focuses on automating the process of report generation using Python. The objective of this task is to read data from a file, analyze the data, and generate a formatted PDF report using Python libraries such as ReportLab or FPDF.

Automated report generation is widely used in real-world applications where data needs to be summarized and presented in a professional format. This task helps in understanding how Python can be used to transform raw data into structured and readable reports without manual effort.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Objective

The main objectives of this task are:

To read structured data from an external file
To analyze and process the data using Python
To generate a formatted PDF report automatically
To understand file handling and report automation concepts
To present data in a clear and professional document format
Tools and Technologies Used

The following tools and libraries were used to complete this task:

Python for implementing the automation logic
Pandas for reading and analyzing input data
ReportLab / FPDF for generating the PDF report
File handling techniques for managing input and output files
Input Data Description

The input data for this task is stored in a file format such as CSV. The file contains structured data that can be easily read and processed using Python. The data is loaded into a Pandas DataFrame, which allows efficient analysis and manipulation. This step ensures that the data is cleaned and ready for report generation.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Implementation Details

The implementation begins by reading the input data file using Pandas. Once the data is loaded, basic analysis is performed such as calculating summary statistics or extracting key values required for the report.

After processing the data, a PDF report is generated using a Python PDF library. The report includes headings, formatted text, and structured content to make it easy to read and professional in appearance. The layout is designed programmatically so that the report can be generated automatically every time the script is executed.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Output and Results

The final output of this task is a formatted PDF report generated automatically from the input data file. The report clearly presents the analyzed data in a readable format. A sample report file is included in the repository to demonstrate the output of the script.

This automated approach reduces manual effort and ensures consistency in report generation.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Deliverables

The following files are included in this repository:

report_generator.py
A Python script that reads data, analyzes it, and generates the PDF report.

sample_report.pdf
A sample output PDF generated by the script.

input_data_file.csv
The input data file used for generating the report.

README.md
Documentation explaining the task, implementation, and output.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Conclusion

This task demonstrates how Python can be used to automate report generation efficiently. It provides practical experience in file handling, data analysis, and document generation. The project successfully fulfills the requirements of Task 2 of the CODTECH Python Internship and highlights the use of Python for building automated reporting solutions.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Output

<img width="577" height="731" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/6b564b62-182b-4b97-a557-242e988662fd" />

Commit message:

Enhance README with implementation and output details
Updated the README to include details about libraries used, report contents, and project deliverables.

README.md, after:

# AUTOMATED-REPORT-GENERATION

*COMPANY*: CODTECH IT SOLUTIONS

*NAME*: SAKHARAM SAWANT

*INTERN ID*: CT04DR2481

*DOMAIN*: PYTHON PROGRAMMING

*DURATION*: 4 WEEKS

*MENTOR*: NEELA SANTHOSH

Task 2: Automated Report Generation Using Python

Introduction

This project has been developed as part of the CODTECH Python Programming Internship. Task 2 focuses on automating the process of report generation using Python. The objective of this task is to read data from a file, analyze the data, and generate a formatted PDF report using Python libraries such as ReportLab or FPDF.

Automated report generation is widely used in real-world applications where data needs to be summarized and presented in a professional format. This task helps in understanding how Python can be used to transform raw data into structured and readable reports without manual effort.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Objective

The main objectives of this task are:

To read structured data from an external file
To analyze and process the data using Python
To generate a formatted PDF report automatically
To understand file handling and report automation concepts
To present data in a clear and professional document format
Tools and Technologies Used

The following tools and libraries were used to complete this task:

Python for implementing the automation logic
Pandas for reading and analyzing input data
ReportLab / FPDF for generating the PDF report
File handling techniques for managing input and output files
Input Data Description

The input data for this task is stored in a file format such as CSV. The file contains structured data that can be easily read and processed using Python. The data is loaded into a Pandas DataFrame, which allows efficient analysis and manipulation. This step ensures that the data is cleaned and ready for report generation.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Implementation Details

The implementation is done using Python with the help of the following libraries:
Pandas: Used for reading Excel data, cleaning column names, and performing calculations.
Matplotlib: Used to generate a quantity-wise bar chart.
ReportLab: Used to create a structured and formatted PDF report.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Output and Results

The output of the project is a PDF report that includes:
A summary of sales data showing total sales, average monthly sales, and the highest sales month
A raw data table displaying all values from the Excel file
A quantity-wise bar chart representing item-based quantity distribution
The report provides a clear and organized view of the data, making it easy to understand sales trends.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Deliverables

- report.py – Python script for data analysis and report generation

- data - Copy.xlsx – Input Excel dataset

- quantity_bar_chart.png – Generated bar chart image

- Excel_Report.pdf – Final PDF report

- README.md – Project documentation

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Conclusion

This task successfully demonstrates how Python can be used for data analysis, visualization, and automated report generation.
By integrating Excel data processing, graphical representation, and PDF creation, the project provides a complete end-to-end reporting solution.
The implementation enhances practical understanding of real-world data handling and reporting, which is an essential skill in data analysis and software development.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Output

<img width="577" height="731" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/6b564b62-182b-4b97-a557-242e988662fd" />
